<h1>Annotated Bibliography for Cultural Assessment of Digital Collections</h1>
<h3>Compiled by the Cultural Assessment Working Group<br/>
of the Digital Library Federation (DLF) Assessment Interest Group<br/>
February, 2017</h3>

<p>This document represents the initial environmental scan surrounding cultural and procedural biases in cultural heritage institutions with a focus on the impact of said biases on digital collections.</p>

<ol><h2>Table of Contents</h2>
<li><a href="#collections-publicizing-and-discoverability">Collection Publicizing and Discoverability</a></li>
<li><a href="#cultural-assessment">Cultural Assessment</a></li>
<li><a href="#cultural-competency">Cultural Competency</a></li>
<li><a href="#cultural-competency-culturally-responsive-methods-and-tools">Cultural Competency: Culturally Responsive Methods and Tools</a></li>
<li><a href="#cultural-competency-repositories-and-systems">Cultural Competency: Repositories and Systems</a></li>
<li><a href="#cultural-competency-users-access-and-communities">Cultural Competency: Users, Access, and Communities</a></li>
<li><a href="#digitization-and-preservation">Digitization and Preservation</a></li>
<li><a href="#ethical-guidelines-protocols-and-legal-instruments">Ethical Guidelines, Protocols, and Legal Instruments</a></li>
<li><a href="#metadata-and-description-practices">Metadata and Description Practices</a></li>
<li><a href="#selection-processes">Selection Processes</a></li>
</ol>

<h2>Collection Publicizing and Discoverability</h2>
<p>Brook, F., Ellenwood, D., & Lazzaro, A. E. (2015). In pursuit of antiracist social justice: Denaturalizing whiteness in the academic library. Library Trends 64(2), 246-284.</p>
<p>The authors describe the primarily white, monocultural space of academic libraries, exploring the ways in which racism is embedded in the spaces, staffing, and services. By applying Critical Race Theory to professional texts produced by ALA, ACRL, the author's’ position these texts as socially situated knowledge. Recognizing the power of narratives to transform and dislodge dominant perceptions, the authors include personal accounts by people of color.</p> 
<p>Johnson, M. (2010). Transgender subject access: History and current practice. Cataloging & Classification Quarterly 48(8), 661-683.</p>
<p>This article evaluates representation of transgender people and experiences in Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH). It compares LCSH treatment of transgender topics to that of controlled vocabularies developed to describe lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender (LGBT) collections, as well as their treatment by scholarly LGBT encyclopedias. The appraisal of these knowledge domains demonstrates the continued relevance of subject descriptors as a mode of knowledge production both for information professionals and for those we serve. It also suggests strategies available to librarians to render transgender people more visible and accessible in library catalogs, including incorporating new technologies as well as modifying established cataloging instruments.</p>
<p>Liobait, I., & Custers, B. (2016). Using sensitive personal data may be necessary for avoiding discrimination in data-driven decision models. Artificial Intelligence and Law 24(2), 183. Retrieved from doi:10.1007/s10506-016-9182-5. </p>
<p>From the regulatory perspective there are two tendencies in relation to this issue: (1) to ensure that data-driven decision making is not discriminatory and (2) to restrict overall collecting and storing of private data to a necessary minimum. This paper shows that from the computing perspective these two goals are contradictory. We demonstrate empirically and theoretically with standard regression models that in order to make sure that decision models are non-discriminatory, for instance, with respect to race, the sensitive racial information needs to be used in the model building process. Of course, after the model is ready, race should not be required as an input variable for decision making. From the regulatory perspective this has an important implication: collecting sensitive personal data is necessary in order to guarantee fairness of algorithms, and law making needs to find sensible ways to allow using such data in the modeling process.</p>
<p>Maloney, M. M. (2012). Cultivating community, promoting inclusivity: Collections as fulcrum for targeted outreach. New Library World, 113(5/6), 281-289.</p>
<p>This paper aims to describe the implementation and analyze the outcomes of the Diversity Book Display initiative at the University of the Pacific's Library. Through this program, curated displays were used to promote multicultural learning and inclusivity, as well as to build intra-institutional relationships with curricular and co-curricular units engaged in diversity work on campus. The mindful leveraging of collections not only provides opportunities for student learning regarding diversity and inclusion, but also can be a platform to build collaborative campus relationships and elevate library visibility. </p>
<p>Masuchika, G. (2013). "Yellowface" in movies: A survey of American academic collections. Collection Building 32(1), 31-36.</p>
<p>The purpose of this paper is to investigate if collection developers in American academic libraries have added predominantly “yellowface” movies to their collections, or have actively sought out movies created and acted by Asian and Asian Americans, to balance out their libraries' collections. No matter how unsavory is our racist past, representations of past bigotry and discrimination should be available for scholars of history, cultural studies, and sociology. However, interpretations of Asians defined with this jaundiced eye must be balanced with movies of Asians and Asian Americans defining themselves.</p>
<p>Mitchell, A. Live from the Reading Room: Correspondence. [Podcast]. Retrieved from https://soundcloud.com/schomburg-collections/sets/live-from-the-reading-room</p>
<p>From the Schomburg Center for Research and Black Culture at the New York Public Library. The podcast hosts read aloud from letters written by or to key historical figures from the African Diaspora.</p>
<p>Rens, A., & Kahn, R. (2009). Access to knowledge in South Africa: Part of the Access to Knowledge Research Series. Cape Town: University of Cape Town. Retrieved from https://edulibpretoria.files.wordpress.com/2008/01/access-to-knowledge-in-sa.pdf. </p>
<p>This study is in two parts, the first part surveys the conditions of access to knowledge and examines two problems, access to learning materials and how policy structures the production of knowledge in South African universities so that the disparities of the past are perpetuated. The second part examines responses to problems of access to knowledge.</p>
<p>Runyon, C., & Houlihan, M. (2012). Revolutionary libraries: Building collections and promoting research about the January 25th uprising in Egypt. Alexandria 23(2), 73-77.</p>
<p>The University on the Square project strives to document the revolution as well as AUC’s scholarly response to the demonstrations, elections, and trials. To accomplish these lofty goals, project coordinators have solicited contributions of photographs, videos, visual art, written testimonials, and oral histories, as well as archived millions of web documents. We are currently expanding our efforts in order to promote the use of our institutional repository by faculty and research centers to provide long-term access to revolutionary papers, presentations, datasets, and lectures. </p>
<p><a href="#annotated-bibliography-for-cultural-assessment-of-digital-collections">Back to Top</a></p>

<h2>Cultural Assessment</h2>
<h3Assessment and Evaluation - Definitions, Frameworks, and Method</h3>
<p>Brophy, P. (2005). The development of a model for assessing the level of impact of information and library services. Library & Information Research 29(93), 43-49.</p>
<p>Provides a useful definition of impact of library services as: “[A]ny effect of a service, product or other ‘event’ on an individual or group. It may be positive or negative; may be what was intended or something entirely different; may result in changed attitudes behaviours, outputs (i.e. what an individual or group produces during or after interaction with the service); may be short or long term; may be critical or trivial.” </p>
<p>Carter, L. R. (2012). Articulating value: Building a culture of assessment in special collections. RBM: A Journal of Rare Books, Manuscripts, and Cultural Heritage 13(2), 89-99.</p>
<p>Addresses some of the challenges cultural heritage institutions such as libraries, museums, and archives face when working with digitized special collections.  These challenges include articulating and demonstrating impact and value.  Additionally, it also includes recommendations to improve assessment practices within these institutions.  These recommendations include: being familiar with your institution's collections, evaluating processing practices regularly for efficiency and effectiveness, understanding how collections and services transform scholarship and generate new knowledge, evaluating your impact in the classroom, and evaluating the ease of use of your online resources.</p>
<p>Duff, W. M., Flinn, A., Suurtamm, K. E., & Wallace, D. A. (2013). Social justice impact of archives: A preliminary investigation. Archival Science 13(4), 317-348. </p>
<p>Discusses how archives can have both positive and negative social justice consequences and demonstrates how archival work can serve social justice goals.  Additionally, it addresses how archival literature has recently been engaging more in discussions on social justice since 2000.  Duff et al. offer both a conceptualization framework for social justice and an archival-social justice framework to help understand archival work’s impact on social justice.</p>
<p>Duff,  W. M., Dryden, J., Limkilde, C., Cherry, J., & Bogomazova, E. (2008). Archivists’ views of user-based evaluation: Benefits, barriers and requirements. American Archivist 71(1), 144-166.</p>
<p>Reviews current archival practices to gather feedback via focus groups with archivists to explore archivists’ attitudes and concerns about user-based evaluations.  It also identifies archivists’ opinions about user-based evaluations, such as:  the type of feedback they value, methods they currently employ to gather feedback from users, benefits and problems posed by conducting formal evaluation studies, and ways archivists would use standardized questionnaires for user-based evaluations if these tools were available.</p>
<p>Duff, W. M., Yakel, E., Tibbo, H., Cherry, J., McKay, A., Krause, M., & Sheffield, R. (2010). The development, testing, and evaluation of the archival metrics toolkits. American Archivist 73(2), 569-599.</p>
<p>Reports of the Archival Metrics Project which developed, tested and created a set of toolkits to help overcome some of the challenges of conducting user-based evaluations in archival repositories. The preliminary results of this project highlighted that even with robust tools, many archives see the administration of a survey as too difficult or onerous. Duff et al. also outline a conceptual framework, which focuses on important contexts identified in interviews and literature review.</p>
<p>Hughes, L. M. (2012). Introduction: The value, use and impact of digital collections. In L. M. Hughes (Ed.), Evaluating and measuring the value, use and impact of digital collections (pp. 1-10). London: Facet Publishing. Retrieved from http://tise2015.kku.ac.th/drupal/sites/default/files/Evaluating%20and%20Measuring%20the%20Value%20-%20Use%20and%20Impact%20of%20Digital%20Collections.pdf</p>
<p>This edited volume asks archivists, librarians, and scholarly practitioners who have built, assembled, or created digital collections to reflect on metrics for them. The case studies are drawn largely from the UK, Australia, and new Zealand. They take a lifecycle approach to digitization and suggest the importance of “peer review” for digital resources, technical and collaborative networks, and considering assessment in planning and funding all stages of projects.  </p>
<p>Marsh, D. E., Punzalan, R., & Leopold, R. (2015). Studying the impact of digitized ethnographic collections: Implications for practitioners. Practicing Anthropology 37(3), 26-31. </p>
<p>Reports on a year-long study examining the impacts of digitized ethnographic collections with an understanding of impact, focused on observable change or effect that would not have occurred in the absence of a given digital resource and service.  This paper also identifies barriers and challenges to assessment, why LAM professionals are skeptical of metrics, and institutional barriers to assessment.  </p>
<p>McCleer, A. (2013). Knowing communities: A review of community assessment literature. Public Library Quarterly 32(3), 263-274. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01616846.2013.818864. </p>
<p>Primarily a literature review of LIS community assessment publications since the late 1800s. The article examines community assessment publications, primarily in Library and Information Science. Instructional resources and publications provide a variety of suggestions for methods of conducting community assessments, while case studies illustrate the successes and challenges of various methods. </p>
<p>Tanner, S. (2012). Measuring the impact of digital resources: The balanced value impact model. London: King’s College London. Retrieved from www.kdcs.kcl.ac.uk/innovation/impact.html.</p>
<p>Presents the Balanced Value Impact Model (BVI Model), a framework that draws evidence from a wide range of sources to assess the impact of digital resources. It defines impact as: “The measurable outcomes arising from the existence of a digital resource that demonstrate a change in the life or life opportunities of the community for which the resource is intended.” The Balanced Value Impact Model is intended to aid the thinking and decision making of those wishing to engage in Impact Assessment. It also acts as a guide through the process of Impact Assessment to enable the core values most appropriate to the assessment to be brought to the fore and given a balanced consideration when evaluating outcomes. It presumes that the assessment will be measuring change within an ecosystem for a digital resource and provides the means of measuring the impact of digital resources using evidence to advocate how change benefits people.</p>
<p><a href="#annotated-bibliography-for-cultural-assessment-of-digital-collections">Back to Top</a></p>

<h2>Cultural Competency</h2>
<p>Ames, M. (1992). Introduction: The critical theory and practice of museums. In Cannibal tours and glass boxes: The anthropology of museums. (pp 3–14). Vancouver, BC: University of British Columbia Press.</p>
<p>Describes the critique of museums as places that have placed “other” cultures in glass boxes. He argues that the anthropological practices of museums need to be reformed if the institutions are to survive. Ames argues that museums should become more like cultural centers in order to make the past more relevant today, and argues that we should look to historically marginalized communities, indigenous groups, and underdeveloped nations for creative innovations.</p>
<p>Edwards, E. (2003). Talking visual histories: Introduction. In L. Peers, & A. Brown (Eds.), Museums and source communities (pp. 83-99). New York: Routledge. Retrieved from http://upir.ir/934/-Museums-and-Source-Communities-A-Routledge-Reader.pdf</p>
<p> Edwards was a pioneering scholar in photography, photographic archives, and visual images in anthropology. This essay introduces many of the main concerns of Edwards’ work regarding issues of representation, the agency of subjects and producers of photographs, and the cultural contingency of images. This volume is also a seminal introductory work for considering originating communities and LAM collections.
<p>Love, J. B. (2001). The assessment of diversity initiatives in academic libraries. Journal Of Library Administration, 33(1/2), 73-103.</p>
<p>Identifies the need for assessment and diagnostic work prior to implementation of diversity initiatives that aim to have a positive and long-term impact on an organization, its members, and its culture. This qualitative study posits that assessment is “a viable tool for diagnosing the level of preparedness of academic libraries for diversity initiative integration” and outlines concerns, an analysis of variables, and key findings. </p>
<p>Miner, H. (1956). Body ritual among the Nacirema. American Anthropologist 58(3), 503-507. Retrieved from http://www.sfu.ca/~palys/Miner-1956-BodyRitualAmongTheNacirema.pdf</p>
<p>For anyone new to cultural anthropology as a discipline, this article is a short introduction to some of its key concepts—namely eurocentrism, exoticism, culture, and cultural relativism. The article describes an “exotic” culture with strange behaviors, and reveals that many of the norms Western society takes for granted (our culture—or shared socially learned behaviors and ideas) are in fact, not so obvious.</p>
<p>Montiel-Overall, P., Villaescusa Nuñez, A., & Reyes-Escudero, V. (2015). Cultural competence. In P. Montiel-Overall, A. Villaescusa Nuñez, & V. Reyes-Escudero (Eds.), Latinos in libraries, museums, and archives: Cultural competence in action!: An asset-based approach (pp. 21-42). Washington, D. C.: Rowman & Littlefield.</p>
<p>Discusses definitions, the cultural competence continuum, and a recommendation for Library and Information Science professionals to adopt an asset-based approach that includes and depends upon contributions and investment from the user community, and identifying those people and community group assets.</p>
<p><a href="#annotated-bibliography-for-cultural-assessment-of-digital-collections">Back to Top</a></p>

<h2>Cultural Competency: Culturally Responsive Methods and Tools</h2>
<p>Bernard, H. R. (2000). Handbook of methods in cultural anthropology. Lanham, MD: AltaMira Press.</p>
<p>Excellent reader in a wide range of methods for research in cross-cultural contexts, including qualitative and quantitative approaches. Contributors draw upon both traditions to explore fieldwork in practice and reflects major developments of the past decade, including: the rising prominence of mixed methods, the emergence of new technologies, and evolving views on ethnographic writing. Spanning the chain of research, from designing a project through methods of data collection and interpretive analysis; the handbook features new chapters on ethnography of online communities, social survey research, and network and geospatial analysis. Considered discussion of ethics, epistemology, and the presentation of research results to diverse audiences round out the volume. </p>
<p>Canadian Urban Libraries Council. (n.d.). The social inclusion audit and toolkit. Retrieved from http://www.siatoolkit.com/#axzz4I5fcpecB</p>
<p>Divided into four sections, the toolkit addresses the importance of social inclusion, the audit toolkit, applying the toolkit to further the work of social inclusion, and references. The Audit Tool is comprised of twelve questions stated as outcome statements. By answering these questions, an institution will receive a score that will provide an assessment of the library’s capacity to meet the requirements stated within the twelve social inclusion outcomes. The intent of the toolkit is to provide a framework for libraries to evaluate or highlight any barriers to patrons from various backgrounds and experiences.</p>
<p>Childrefn’s Bureau, Administration for Children and Families, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2014). A roadmap for collaborative and effective evaluation in tribal communities. Retrieved from https://www.acf.hhs.gov/cb/resource/tribal-workgroup</p>
<p>This guide identifies values and priorities that can foster trust and build the knowledge and skills of Tribes, their evaluation partners, and other stakeholders to conduct more useful and meaningful evaluations of child welfare programs.</p>
<p>Diamond, J., Luke, J., & Uttal, D. (2009). Practical evaluation guide: Tools for museums and other informal educational settings. Lanham, MD: Altamira Press.</p>
<p>This book is an excellent practical guide and introduction to evaluation practice in the museum field and in other informal learning settings (zoos, science centers, gardens, parks, etc.), such as observational tracking, questionnaires, and interviews. It includes the full range of methods used in museum visitor studies and audience research, including qualitative and quantitative approaches, and useful techniques in designing studies, applied methods, analyzing data, and applying findings. Many practices are transferable to other educational settings/contexts.</p>
<p>Lassiter, L. ( 2005). The Chicago guide to collaborative ethnography. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>
<p>Lassiter shows the long history of collaborative practice in anthropology (esp. American tradition) and writes something of a treatise on contemporary collaborative projects. He argues for achieving “more deliberate and explicit collaborative ethnography,” founded on 4 commitments: 1. ethical and moral responsibility to consultants as “co-intellectuals and collaborators;” 2. Honesty and humility about the research process, keeping an ongoing ethical and moral commitment while being forthcoming about how researchers and participants influence each other; 3. accessible and dialogic writing as an ethical practice; 4. collaborative reading, writing, and co-interpretation of ethnographic texts with consultants; and which merges research with activism and citizenship. While the author outlines these guidelines as ideal and ethical, however, he also notes that not all projects ought to be wholly collaborative, and shows overall how the uncritical acceptance of conventional ethical codes also presents its own ethical dilemmas.</p>
<p>Marsh, D. E., Punzalan, R. L.,  Leopold, R., Petrozzi, M. & Butler, B. (2015). Stories of impact: The role of narrative in understanding the value and impact of digital collections. Archival Science 16(4), 327-372.</p>
<p>Proposes a framework for documenting, demonstrating and assessing the impact of digitized ethnographic collections (those originating from source communities or otherwise multicultural in nature). The authors argue that collecting and categorizing stories is a valid and more culturally appropriate mode of documenting impact of these kinds of collections. Based on a yearlong pilot study at eight institutions, the research exposed three categories of stories used by participants —metrics, singular, and abstract— and their audience and internal institutional impacts. While there are many institutional barriers to assessment, the authors argue that this method is an achievable and meaningful way to evaluate this kind of digitization work. </p>
<p>Seadle, M. (2000). Project ethnography: An anthropological approach to assessing digital library services. Library Trends 49(2), 370-385.</p>
<p>Argues that rather than assessing overall success or failure of digital library services, institutions should understand the diverse stakeholders and developers who collaborate in the production of digital collections. Seadle posits that anthropology provides a framework for understanding diverse viewpoints and cultural values in order to make “informed choices” about survey, focus group, or population design. The article takes the National Gallery of the Spoken Word (NGSW) at Michigan State University (www.ngsw.org) as a case study, and includes brief descriptions of nine NGSW micro-cultures (the NGSW partners the University library, the College of engineering, the College of Education and MATRIX--the Center for the Humane Arts, letters and Social Sciences Online—in the College of Arts and Letters).</p>
<p>Simon, N. (2010). Evaluating participatory projects. In The participatory museum. Santa Cruz, CA: Museum 2.0. Retrieved from http://www.participatorymuseum.org/chapter10/</p>
<p>Simon’s approach to evaluation draws on her commitment to relevant, localized, community-driven work. She argues for making evaluation itself participatory —to include communities in the process and outcomes. Goals for these projects stray from typical models of “success”— they are more about participant comfort, eagerness to share, creating a “safe space to share”, and overall engagement than visitor numbers or revenue. She considers indicators such as staff/participant relationships and the volume or pace of participant-institutional correspondence.</p>
<p>Smith, L. T. (1999). Decolonizing methodologies: Research and indigenous peoples. London: Zed Books.</p>
<p>Reviews research in the European colonial past and present, and shows how imperialist models of knowledge are embedded in research and other Western categories of knowledge. The book (originally intended for Indigenous scholars and communities but has become canonical for settler scholars as well) argues for a more ethical, empathetic, and useful path forward through decolonizing methodologies, which gives primary agency to Indigenous peoples to know and describe their own knowledge and histories, requires opening the research field to Indigenous scholars, and entails the broader incorporation of Indigenous ways of knowing, being, and categorizing the world into Western institutions. </p>
<p>Srinivasan, R., Boast, R. Becvar, K. M., & Furner, J. (2009). Blobgects: Digital museum catalogs and diverse user communities. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 60(4), 666-678.</p>
<p>The authors describe and analyze “Blobgects,” an experimental social media-based interface mimicking an online museum catalog at the Cambridge Museum of Anthropology and Archaeology (CMAA). They compare two user groups (Canadian Inuit students at Inukshuk High School in Iqaluit, Nunavut and group of master’s-level students in the Department of Information Studies at UCLA), and find that the capacity to tag/comment didn’t allow users to engage deeply with digital objects (although the study lacked visual imagery). The “specialist language” used by museum catalogues does not sufficiently contextualize content or encourage dialogue in the way that these technologies are purported to. The authors advocate technologies that contextualize material, move beyond technical jargon, and allow for “different sort of engagement with local descriptions and vernacular accounts from diverse expert communities, one which lets users make sense of objects in relation to their own needs, uses, and understandings.”</p>
<p>Yakel, E. & Tibbo, H. (2010). Standardized survey tools for assessment in archives and special collections. Performance Measurement and Metrics 11(2), 211-222.</p>
<p>This paper aims to discuss the conceptualization, development, and testing of Archival Metrics Toolkits. The development and adoption of standardized metrics to support the management of both analog and digital collections is a critical need in archives and manuscript collections. The Archival Metrics Toolkits were created, and comprised five user‐based evaluation instruments for archives and special collections in colleges and universities: researcher, archival web sites, online finding aids, student researchers, and teaching support.</p>
<p>Zorich, D. (2003). A survey on digital cultural heritage initiatives and their sustainability concerns. Washington, D.C.: Council on Library and Information Services.</p>
<p>Zorich conducted a survey asking institutions about sustainability goals, including whether digital cultural heritage initiatives were becoming sustainable or trying to remain sustainable. Some issues preventing institutions from achieving sustainability goals are: economic downturn, general funding strategies, unclear mission/goals, restricted or lack of accepted standards, failed business models, rapid growth that outgrows the institution, intellectual property issues, lack of public interest/appeal/understanding, straddling digital/analog worlds, and costs of technology.</p>
<p><a href="#annotated-bibliography-for-cultural-assessment-of-digital-collections">Back to Top</a></p>

<h2>Cultural Competency: Repositories and Systems</h2>
<p>Christen-Withey, K. (2015). Tribal archives, traditional knowledge, and local contexts: Why the “s” matters. Journal of Western Archives 6(1). Retrieved from http://digitalcommons.usu.edu/westernarchives/vol6/iss1/3/</p>
<p>Introduces the Local Contexts project (http://www.localcontexts.org) and the Traditional Knowledge License and Label platform, which seek to reimagine intellectual property frameworks for preserving, managing, and reusing digital cultural heritage in order to more ethically and responsively meet the needs of Indigenous communities, libraries, archives and museums. Local Contexts provides support for Indigenous communities to manage cultural heritage in digital environments. It offers strategies for controlling the intellectual property, access or copyright status of digital assets that recognize Indigenous sovereignty. For scholars and practitioners, incorporating Indigenous knowledge systems begins to decolonize archival practices and increase access to collections.</p>
<p>Turner, H. (2016). Critical histories of museum catalogues. Museum Anthropology 39(2), 102-110.</p>
<p>Special issue of Museum Anthropology that made an important (and interdisciplinary) move to take a critical scholarly approach to museum cataloging and its history. Turner, an information scholar and anthropologist, argues for museum documentation as a unique kind of knowledge production, material culture, and epistemological practice. Each paper in the issue explores historical cataloguing practices through case studies that explore different contexts, collections, and individuals involved in the development of categories, classification systems and standards. </p>
<p><a href="#annotated-bibliography-for-cultural-assessment-of-digital-collections">Back to Top</a></p>

<h2>Cultural Competency: Users, Access, and Communities</h2>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong><br/>
Focus on cultural anthropology and museum studies sources<br/>
Additional resources in Publicizing and Discoverability section</p>

<p>Coffee, K.  (2008) Cultural inclusion, exclusion and the formative roles of museums. Museum Management and Curatorship 23(3). doi: 10.1080/09647770802234078</p>
<p>Brief look at the socio-cultural context of museums (and broadly applicable to other cultural heritage institutions—including libraries) and how they relate to a much larger network of inclusion and exclusion in the overall cultural context. The argument being, in order to fulfill a public mission of inclusivity, one must first understand how practices support or suppress narratives and group affinity within the larger society. The article focuses on the influence of museums and the impact of types of users, cultural context and outside influences such as formal education, stereotypes and group identity and visitor/user intentions and expectations. This article provides a glimpse into possible influences and ideological development surrounding cultural heritage spaces.</p>
<p>Geismar, H., & Mohns, W. (2011). Social relationships and digital relationships: Rethinking the database at the Vanuatu Cultural Centre.  Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 17(s1), S133-S155.</p>
<p>For those looking for an example of a community-driven database, this article provides a short overview of the benefits and challenges associated with archival database creation for this initiative. The database is a museum archive and is not available to the public, but this piece could provide a context for those building archives that are publically accessible, and even those that must remain private. The article touches on the changing relationship between the museologists and the local community during the creation of the database, and reflects on what that might mean in the future. The database also provides an example of working with communities that are not English speaking, and this project is an example of a trilingual database with a working ontology for search and discovery.</p>
<p>Hennessy, K. (2009). Virtual repatriation and digital cultural heritage: The ethics of managing online collections. Anthropology News (April), 5-6.</p>
<p>This short piece is an excellent introduction to the ways anthropologists are considering new technologies, access, representation, and ethical concerns around ethnographic (or culturally specific) archives and other collections. Hennessy describes the new relationships individual anthropologists and institutions are forming, drawing on her work with the Doig River First Nation.</p>
<p>Hollinger, E. et al. (2013). Tlingit-Smithsonian collaborations with 3D digitization of cultural objects. Museum Anthropology Review 7(1-2), 201-253.</p>
<p>This article describes a collaboration between the Smithsonian and the Tlingit community to 3D digitize collections in a responsible way. In some cases, 3D replicas replaced objects that were repatriated to the community. It is an excellent case study of using new technologies to increase access while adhering to cultural protocols and ethical concerns.</p>
<p>Joffrion, E., & Fernández, N. (2015). Collaborations between tribal and nontribal organizations: Suggested best practices for sharing expertise, cultural resources, and knowledge. The American Archivist 78(1), 192-237. Retrieved from http://cedar.wwu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1030&context=library_facpubs. </p>
<p>Collaborations between tribal and non-tribal organizations bring diverse communities together, often for the first time, to educate and learn, to address misinterpretations of the past, and to share cultural resources and knowledge. By examining data obtained through a nationally distributed survey, this research explores how successful partnerships between tribal and non-tribal institutions are initiated, developed, and maintained; examines the degree to which the protocols for Native American archival materials were used in the development of policies, procedures, and memorandums of understanding; and reveals the “lessons learned” across a wide range of collaborative projects and partnerships. </p>
<p>Mathe, B. (2014). Whose pictures are these? Indigenous community access and control of digital archives. Presentation at the Girona 2014 Archives and Cultural Industries Conference. Retrieved from http://www.girona.cat/web/ica2014/ponents/textos/id240.pdf.</p>
<p>Broad overview of the many and complex issues surrounding indigenous archives, with an emphasis on photographic images. Most of these historical pictures are held in institutions at great distance from the culture represented, often with missing context and incorrect data. Selected collections have been digitized but most have not. Only some indigenous communities have their own web site, but even those that do are subject to misrepresentation of their culture online by outsiders. The American Museum of Natural History (AMNH) has begun to digitize its extensive photographic collection that also includes, at minimum, 10,000 images taken during anthropological work in North America. The Museum Library is examining how best to make the photographs, along with motion pictures, available—particularly to the source communities where they were taken—in a manner that recognizes and respects that cultures have varying knowledge structures and traditions relating to access.</p>
<p>Rowley, S. (2013). The reciprocal research network: The development process. Museum Anthropology Review 7(1-2), 22-43.</p>
<p>Describes the development of the Reciprocal Research Network (RRN). The RRN is a collaboratively planned and designed online collections database that links Northwest Coast collections across the globe. Twelve initial institutions were consulted in the early planning process. More importantly, the RRN’s infrastructure and interface was co-developed by three First Nations organizations—the Musqueam Indian Band, the Stó:lō Nation, and the U’mista Cultural Society—making it a great case study in culturally relevant and community-driven projects. The article describes the process of planning and implementing the RRN in detail, including exposing tensions in the project.</p>
<p>Srinivasan, R. et al. (2010). Diverse knowledges and contact zones within the digital museum. Science, Technology, & Human Values 35(5), 735-768.</p>
<p>Expands the concept of the “contact zone”—famously used in the context of museums by Clifford (1997), citing Pratt (1992) to describe museums as places where different cultural visions and community interests are negotiated. The article describes a collaborative research project between the Cambridge University Museum of Anthropology and Archaeology, UCLA, and the A:shiwi A:wan Museum and Heritage Center. The project found that digital objects allowed for better representation and documentation of different knowledges about objects. In particular, Indigenous community knowledge could be contributed to descriptive information and categories to support cultural revitalization efforts. This is a useful model for other repositories seeking to decolonize or become more culturally responsive.</p>
<p><a href="#annotated-bibliography-for-cultural-assessment-of-digital-collections">Back to Top</a></p>

<h2>Digitization and Preservation</h2>
<p>Chen, G. (2014). Intangible cultural heritage preservation: An exploratory study of digitization of the historical literature of Chinese Kunqu opera librettos. Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage 7(1). Retrieved from http://dl.acm.org.ezproxy1.lib.asu.edu/citation.cfm?id=2583114</p>
<p>This article introduces the study contents and some research findings regarding digital preservation methods for Chinese Kunqu opera libretto historical literature. This project is an example of dealing with non-western syntax and symbology to digital construct the cultural context of the opera. The project proposes a novel editable text method to represent the multidimensional tree-like information structure of the Kunqu libretto literature and a musical semantic annotation method based on numbered musical notation to accommodate the musical features of Kunqu librettos. To maintain the characteristics of the original Kunqu musical notation, it proposes a method to reconstruct Kunqu libretto on the Web based on scalable vector graphics.</p>
<p>Conway, P. (2010). Preservation in the age of Google: Digitization, digital preservation, and dilemmas. The Library Quarterly: Information, Community, Policy 80(1), 61-79. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/648463</p>
<p>Preservation in the Age of Large-Scale Digitization explores the implications for preservation practice of the digitization of books and, by implication, our cultural heritage in general.</p>
<p>Drijfhout, D. (2007). Digital preservation practices in South Africa: Review of existing policy, legislation, guidelines and standards. Alexandria: The Journal of National and International Library and Information Issues 19(1), 57-63.</p>
<p>The study concluded that efforts are being made to develop a digital preservation strategy for electronic publications to add a public interest copyright exception according to the Department of Arts and Culture (2012) that allows places of legal deposit to make copies (including digital copies) of works in their lawful possession for purposes of preservation, replacement, or security.</p>
<p>Hunt, D., & Stephensen, S. A. (2016). Decolonizing geographies of power: Indigenous digital counter-mapping practices on Turtle Island. Settler Colonial Studies. Retrieved from http://resources.ethnosproject.org/decolonizing-geographies-of-power-indigenous-digital-counter-mapping-practices-on-turtle-island/.</p>
<p>This paper addresses the decolonizing potential of Indigenous counter-mapping in the context of (what is now called) Canada. After historicizing cartography as a technique of colonial power, and situating Indigenous counter-mapping as an assertion of political and intellectual sovereignty, the paper examines the digital map of Amiskwaciwâskahikan (Plains Cree for Edmonton, Alberta) produced by the Pipelines Collective, which overlays Treaty Indigenous maps onto ‘conventional’ maps to denaturalize and challenge colonial renderings of city space. The paper then discusses the expanding trend of guerrilla mapping techniques engaged in by Indigenous groups, emphasizing the Ogimaa Mikana project in Toronto, wherein Anishinaabemowin names were stickered over settler street names. Expanding the spatial theories of Michel de Certeau and Gilles Deleuze, and drawing on the research and insights of Indigenous scholars Jodi Byrd and Mishuana Goeman, the paper considers how emerging digital counter-mapping efforts offer ambivalent possibilities for Indigenous peoples to assert their presence in material ways.</p>
<p>Karavia, D., & Georgopoulos A. (2013). Placing intangible cultural heritage. Presentation at the Digital Heritage International Congress. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/DigitalHeritage.2013.6743815</p>
<p>[International Cultural Heritage] is in danger of disappearance or degradation due to globalization, immigration, urbanization etc. On the other hand, ICH is strongly related to the features of space. It is formed and developed in a specific location, which is influenced by the vicinity to other civilizations therefore it is important to capture and analyze the various forms of ICH, to extract the latent human creativity hidden in them, while at the same time studying the influence of space on their evolution. Their capture should be done by implementing appropriate equipment, methods and archival formats to fully describe them and to ensure the preservation of the resulting digital archives.</p>
<p>Lach, P., Rosenblum, B., Ortega, E., & Gamble, S. (2016). Peripheries, barriers, hierarchies: Toward a praxis of critical librarianship and digital humanities. dh+lib 2016. Retrieved from http://acrl.ala.org/dh/2016/07/29/peripheries-barriers-hierarchies/</p>
<p>We learned many lessons from the 2015 DH Forum—lessons about DH librarianship and practice, as well as lessons about the powerful role librarians can play in creating safe, cross-disciplinary, and inclusive spaces to foster these kinds of conversations.</p>
<p>Mak, B. (2014). Archaeology of a Digitization. Journal of the Association of Information Science and Technology 65(8). doi: 10.1002/asi.23061</p>
<p>This study proposes an archaeology as a means of exploring the practices by which digitally encoded resources are generated, circulated, and received. The discussion grapples with the ambiguous relationship between digitizations and their exemplars in the well-known database, Early English Books Online (EEBO), and suggests ways in which digitizations might be analyzed as witnesses of current perceptions about the past and used accordingly in scholarly research. The article therefore offers a critical reading of EEBO and its digitizations as part of a broader effort to investigate the role of digitally encoded resources in the transmission of ideas and the production of cultural heritage.</p>
<p>Ogilvie, B. (2016). Scientific archives in the age of digitization. Isis 107(1). doi: 10.1086/686075</p>
<p>This paper posits that historians must be aware of the scope of digitization, the reasons why material is chosen to be digitized, and limitations on the dissemination of digitized sources. Furthermore, some physical aspects of sources, and of collections of sources, are lost in their digital simulacra.</p>
<p>Pigliasco, G. (2009). Intangible cultural property, tangible databases, visible debates: The Sawau project. International Journal of Cultural Property 16(3), 255-272. Retrieved from http://search.proquest.com.ezproxy1.lib.asu.edu/docview/232081106</p>
<p>Pacific Island countries continue to face unauthorized uses of their traditional knowledge and practices. In response, international agencies in collaboration with Pacific Island countries are promoting sui generis forms of protection. The Institute of Fijian Language and Culture's Cultural Mapping Programme looks beyond ongoing debates about indigenous collection and digitization of intangible heritage to promote sui generis protection measures in lieu of western intellectual property law. Supported by an Institute grant, the unfolding Sawau Project creates an archive of sites, stories, and shared memories of the Sawau people of Beqa, an island iconic in Fiji for its firewalking practice (vilavilairevo). Advocating a form of social intervention in situ, The Sawau Project has become a collaborative tool to encourage digital documentation, linkages, and institutional collaborations among Fijian communities and their allies to negotiate and promote alternative forms of protection.</p>
<p>Rosenzweig, M. C. (2000). What progressive librarians believe: An international perspective. A presentation to the Vienna International Library Conference of AKRIBIE at the Dr. Karl-Renner-Institut, Vienna, 2000. Progressive Librarian’s Guild. Retrieved from http://progressivelibrariansguild.org/content/Vienna2000.shtml</p>
<p>This article discusses libraries as institutional actors in the preservation and extension of democracy and that libraries are not neutral ground regarding decisions about what content is preserved, made accessible, and what technological burdens for use may be passed along to the viewer. The decisions to preserve various content over others (and how it is made accessible) is shaped by the organizational structures and viewpoints inherent in institutions, including libraries. The article offers discussion about libraries’ roles in democracy, access to information, and the “public good.   </p>
<p>Stanco, F., Battiato, S., & Gallo, G. (2011). Digital imaging for cultural heritage preservation: Analysis, restoration, and reconstruction of ancient artwork. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. Retrieved from https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=LaLMBQAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PP1&ots=GXlYSxjhLu&sig=O5aDVaEEe01gmycXIhxxTByWLfk#v=onepage&q&f=false</p>
<p>Several good chapters, including Copyright Protection of Digital Images of Cultural Heritage, Using 3-D Models for Study and Restoration of Cultural Heritage Artifacts, and two about illumination and imaging/photography of objects. The book highlights motivations and processes for cultural heritage object preservation.</p>
<p><a href="#annotated-bibliography-for-cultural-assessment-of-digital-collections">Back to Top</a></p>

<h2>Ethical Guidelines, Protocols, and Legal Instruments</h2>
<p>American Philosophical Society. (2013). Protocols for the treatment of indigenous materials.  Retrieved from https://amphilsoc.org/library/protocols-for-indigenous-materials</p>
<p>Protocols developed by the American Philosophical Society to help 1) give APS guidance in determining what indigenous materials might be culturally sensitive, in categorizing materials as culturally sensitive, and in determining who can decide whether culturally sensitive materials can be reproduced; 2) to allow APS to enter into understandings and agreements with tribes and donors on the treatment of indigenous materials; and 3) give APS guidance in assisting tribes in publishing materials.  While these are specific to indigenous materials held by APS, they can be applied to indigenous materials held by other institutions.</p>
<p>Assembly of First Nations & the Canadian Museums Association. (1994). Task force report on museums and first peoples. Retrieved from http://museums.in1touch.org/uploaded/web/docs/Task_Force_Report_1994.pdf</p>
<p>Identifies the findings of a working group focused on developing an ethical framework and strategies for Aboriginal Nations to represent their history and culture in concert with cultural institutions. Major findings of the national consultations by the task force include: the importance of cultural objects in museum collections, increased involvement of First People’s in interpretation, improved access to museum collections, repatriation, training, support for cultural institutions, funding, and international collections.  Recommendations from the task force to establishing partnerships between First Peoples and Canadian museums include:  interpretation, access, repatriation of human remains, objects of cultural patrimony, and foreign holdings, training, and implementation.</p>
<p>First Archivist Circle. (2007, April 9). Protocols for Native American archival materials. Retrieved from http://www2.nau.edu/libnap-p/protocols.html</p>
<p>Identifies best professional practices for culturally responsive care and use of American Indian archival materials held by non-tribal organizations.  Topics addressed include: building relationships of mutual respect, striving for balance in context and perspectives, accessibility and use, culturally sensitive materials, providing context, Native American intellectual property issues, copying and repatriation of records to Native American communities, Native American research protocols, reciprocal education and training, and awareness of Native American communities and issues.</p>
<p>NAGPRA legislation, The National NAGPRA website, http://www.cr.nps.gov/nagpra/</p>
<p>Web resource that lists and provides access to laws, regulations, and guidance to assist museum, agencies, and Native American communities in carrying out the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act.  </p>
<p>Society of American Archivists. (2017). Cultural framework. Retrieved from http://www2.archivists.org/groups/cultural-heritage-working-group/cultural-framework  </p>
<p>Description of a White’s Pluralization framework that was developed for the specific purpose of systematically incorporating the interests, needs, and cultural beliefs of diverse communities into archival education curricula.  The framework consists of elements, including: conceptual expansion, embeddedness, collaboration, reflexivity, leadership, activism, and ethics.  This framework emphasizes dialogic action, which “is the epistemological relationship of dialogue, which is the means of developing a better understanding about the object of knowledge without aims of correcting, appropriating, or illegitimating it.”</p>
<p>Underhill, Karen J. (2006). Protocols for Native American archival materials. RBM: A Journal of Rare Books, Manuscripts, and Cultural Heritage 7(2), 134–145. </p>
<p>Identifies best professional practices for culturally responsive care and use of American Indian archival materials held by non-tribal organizations.  Topics include: building relationships of mutual respect, striving for balance in context and perspectives, accessibility and use, culturally sensitive materials, providing context, Native American intellectual property issues, copying and repatriation of records to Native American communities, Native American research protocols, reciprocal education and training, and awareness of Native American communities and issues.</p>
<p>United Nations Office of the High Commissioner. (2007). UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. Retrieved from http://www.unhchr.ch/huridocda/huridoca.nsf/(Symbol)/E.CN.4.SUB.2.RES.1994.45.En?OpenDocument</p>
<p>Provides a global framework for efforts to advance indigenous peoples’ rights developed by the United Nations General Assembly.  It is designed to assist institutions in learning about the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (the Declaration) by providing a broad understanding of the legal nature of the rights it contains, as well as the relevant obligations of States, in order to ensure that indigenous peoples’ rights are fully realized.</p>
<p><a href="#annotated-bibliography-for-cultural-assessment-of-digital-collections">Back to Top</a></p>

<h2>Metadata and Description Practices</h2>
<p>Adler, M. (2013). Gender expression in a small world: Social tagging of transgender-themed books. Proceedings of the Association for Information Science & Technology 50(1), 1-8.</p>
<p>Social tagging is evaluated as an information behavior in a small world, using Chatman, Burnett, and Besant's Theory of Normative Behavior. A survey was distributed to people who assign tags to transgender-themed books in LibraryThing, a social network site that allows members to catalog and tag their personal book collections. This study first establishes that there is an identifiable community of interest and then lays the groundwork for understanding the function of tagging in sharing information among a marginalized community for whom vocabulary and taxonomies are vital.</p>
<p>Alemu, G., & Stevens, B. (2015). The Web 2.0 paradigm and the emergence of socially-constructed metadata approaches. In An emergent theory of digital library metadata: Enrich then filter (pp. 29-42). Waltham, MA: Chandos Publishing.</p>
<p>The authors describe the Web 2.0 paradigm as ‘participatory’ in nature, noting that users are now not only consumers of information, but producers as well. They argue that this new paradigm provides opportunities for digital libraries to better reflect the needs and interests of their user communities by letting go of the assumption that there is a single ‘correct’ way of describing and understanding the world.  </p>
<p>Billey, A., Drabinski, E., & Roberto, K. R. (2014). What's gender got to do with it? A critique of RDA 9.7. Cataloging & Classification Quarterly 52(4), 412-421.</p>
<p>The Library of Congress (LC) and the Program for Cooperative Cataloging (PCC) interpretation of Resource Description and Access (RDA) 9.7 regarding gender when identifying persons reinforces regressive conceptions of gender identity. The rule instructs catalogers to record gender when identifying persons, and although RDA gives catalogers the flexibility to record more than two gender labels, LC limits Name Authority Cooperative Program (NACO) catalogers to a binary label: male, female, or not known. In this article, the authors challenge gender as a descriptive attribute for personal names, critique how LC is instructing NACO catalogers to record elements about gender, and make recommendations to address describing persons in LC authority records.</p>
<p>Borgman, C., & Rasmussen, E. (2005). Usability of digital libraries in a multicultural environment. In Design and usability of digital libraries: Case studies in the Asia Pacific (pp. 270-284). Hershey, PA: Information Science Publishing.</p>
<p>This chapter introduces a section dealing with usability of digital libraries. Usability can be considered an aspect of digital library assessment. The authors do not touch on metadata explicitly, but note several important issues related to culture that can be ‘translated’ into metadata qualities or characteristics. For example, they note use of languages and scripts; ‘varying representations for dates, calendars, time, currency, numbers, units of measurement, addresses, and phone numbers’ as ‘objective culture’. More difficult are the subjective cultural identity and how to operationalize these for specific audiences. They discuss four types of evaluation that may be relevant for digital libraries: formative (establish baselines), summative (checking against intended goals), iterative (set and assess goals regularly), comparative (compare across systems), and note that it is important to be mindful of the fact that digital libraries should be evaluated in the context of specific applications.</p>
<p>Bryant, M. (2015). Whāia te mātauranga - How are research libraries in Aotearoa New Zealand applying Ngā Ūpoko Tukutuku / the Māori Subject Headings and offering them to users? School of Information Management - Te Kura Tiaki, Whakawhiti Kōrero: MIS Research Papers. Retrieved from http://researcharchive.vuw.ac.nz/handle/10063/1397. URI: http://hdl.handle.net/10063/4633 </p>
<p>The author evaluated the uptake and use of subject headings in the Ngā Ūpoko Tukutuku/the Māori Subject Headings (MSH), which were released in 2006, with the aim of “provid[ing] a structured path to subjects that Māori customers can…use to find material in libraries…using terms familiar to Māori and arranged in a hierarchy that reflects the Māori view of the world. (p.2)” The project is a world leader and internationally well-regarded, but very little literature has been published evaluating the uptake and use of the MSH.</p>
<p>Chen, S. (2014). A holistic perspective on indigenous digital libraries in Taiwan. Presentation at 2014 IFLA World Library and Information Congress. Retrieved from http://resources.ethnosproject.org/a-holistic-perspective-on-indigenous-digital-libraries-in-taiwan/</p>
<p>This paper reports on the development of Taiwan indigenous digital libraries representing fourteen groups with about five hundred and two thousand indigenous people. The study reviews 50 indigenous-related projects and initiatives in the Taiwan E-learning & Digital Archives Program (TELDAP), and concludes 5 findings of Taiwan’s indigenous digital library, each demonstrates (1) the main constructors and their disciplines and professional backgrounds; (2) the models for indigenous community participation and engagement in digitization; (3) the characteristics of digital collection development; (4) the design and interoperability of metadata for digitized collections; (5) the access to the indigenous digital library. </p>
<p>Digital Library North. (2014). The challenge. Retrieved from https://sites.ualberta.ca/~dln/</p>
<p>The SSHRC-funded project will create a digital library infrastructure to address the unique information needs in Canada’s northern regions. The resulting project was made by using community driven needs assessment, tapping into Indigenous knowledge and their way of understanding and knowing things. Includes cultural heritage object description creation and extending the language capabilities of the digital collection metadata.</p>
<p>Drabinski, E. (2013). Queering the catalog: Queer theory and the politics of correction. Library Quarterly I(2), 94-111.</p>
<p>The author describes the fundamental problem of individuals (catalogers) sorting and naming material, pointing out that it is based on the assumption that identity is fixed, and determining a correct term is possible, and is a task that lies within the domain of catalogers. Queer theory offers a way to inquire into the ways in which this descriptive work reinforces the perspectives of those in power. Drabinski shares examples of possible interventions, such as developing local vocabularies, and invites public service librarians to work with patrons to engage with the library catalog as they would a text, challenging the structure and language.</p>
<p>Farnel, S. et al. (2016). Of places and names: Working with Northern Canadian Communities to enhance subject access to digital resources. Paper presented at IFLA WLIC 2016 – Columbus, OH – Connections. Collaboration. Community in Session 151 - Classification and Indexing. Retrieved from http://library.ifla.org/1326/1/151-farnel-en.pdf</p>
<p>This paper describes a collaboration between researchers at the University of Alberta, staff at the Inuvialuit Cultural Resource Centre, and communities within the Inuvialuit Settlement Region (ISR) of Canada’s Northwest Territories to develop a culturally appropriate and relevant metadata framework for a digital library of cultural resources. To develop the first draft metadata framework, the Digital Library North (DLN) project team carried out an extensive critical examination. Analysis of the information audit, survey responses, and interview transcripts indicated that the metadata should include resource type, language(s) and dialect(s), topic(s), variant forms of names of people and places, individuals or organizations and their roles, audience, and access and reuse conditions, and should allow for community addition of metadata in the form of keywords, tags or stories.</p>
<p>Fox, M. J. (2011). Prototype theory: An alternative concept theory for categorizing sex and gender? Knowledge Organization 38(4), 328-334.</p>
<p>The author explores whether prototype theory could be used to define gender, replacing classical concept theory, which does not capture the nuance of gender. Prototype Theory uses Wittgenstein’s “family resemblance” concept to define categories, which allows for some common attributes to be met, rather than all attributes. When used in gender categorization, this allows for more fluid identities and avoids essentialism. Implementation presents challenges, such as the potential for the categories to be dominated by the majority, and the complicated relationship with perception, and the potential lack of stability that a classification system requires.</p>
<p>Hogan, K. (2010). “Breaking secrets” in the catalog: Proposing the black queer studies collection at the University of Texas at Austin. Progressive Librarian 34, 50-57.</p>
<p>The BQSC project provides an ideal entry into articulating the critical practice of library staff because scholars of its subject, the field of African and African American LGBT studies, explain how categorization and naming have played a central role in supporting historical and ongoing oppression. Concerns of categorization, erasure, and renaming remain at the core of African and African American Studies and its intersections with fields including queer theory and transgender studies. Institutions have used quantification and categorization to oppress each and all of these identities. In turn, social movements founded in liberal rights-based theories of liberation have appealed for entrance into categories of acceptability, thus indicating the power of identity categories.</p>
<p>Hughes, M. et al. (2013). Assessing and measuring impact of a digital collection in the humanities: An analysis of the SPHERE (Stormont Parliamentary Hansards: Embedded in Research and Education) Project. Lit Linguist Computing 30(2), 183-198. doi: 10.1093/llc/fqt054</p>
<p>This article presents the methodology, findings, and analysis of the project. The authors argue that TIDSR is a useful and critically transferrable method to understand and increase the impact of digital resources. The findings of the project are modified into a series of wider recommendations on protecting the investment in digital resources by increasing their use, value, and impact. It is reasonable to suggest that effectively showing the impact of Digital Humanities is critical to its survival.</p>
<p>Keilty, P. (2012). Sexual boundaries and subcultural discipline. Knowledge Organization 39(6), 417-431.</p>
<p>The purpose of this essay is to demonstrate that the mechanisms of power around classifications of gender and sexuality are not always top-down or bottom-up. Instead, the weight of social discipline among members of sexual subcultures themselves helps to create these classifications, often reflecting the nomenclature of subjects and desires within sexual subcultures in a complex relationship to a dominant culture. In the process, this paper allows us to reassess, first, a presupposition of folksonomies as free of discipline allowing for their emancipatory potential and, second, the prevailing binary understandings of authority in the development of sexual nomenclatures and classifications as either top-down or bottom-up.</p>
<p>Khazraee, E., & Park, J. (2010). Lessons learned from EIAH Metadata Application Profile (EMAP). Cataloging & Classification Quarterly 48(5), 472-485. Retrieved from  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01639371003776582</p>
<p>Ontologies on the Semantic Web form a basis for representing human-conceivableknowledge in a machine-understandable manner. Ontology development for a specific knowledge domain is, however, a difficult task, because the representation produced has to be adequately detailed and broad enough at the same time. The CIDOC-CRM is such an ontology, pertaining to cultural heritage, which we align to the Semantic Web environment: first, transforming it to the Web Ontology Language (OWL) and then profiling it not in the usual flat metadata sense, but by refining and extending its conceptual structures, taking advantage of OWL semantics. This kind of profiling maintains applicability of the model, while enabling more expressive reasoning tasks. To this end, we construct a mechanism for acquiring implied and web-distributed information that is used to conduct and present a series of experimental inferences on the CRM-profiled form.</p>
<p>Lagos, N. (2015). On the preservation of evolving digital content – The continuum approach and relevant metadata models. In Metadata and semantics research (pp. 15-26). doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-24129-6_2</p>
<p>Preserving objects and their associated environment introduces high level of complexity. The authors describe a model-driven approach, termed the Continuum approach, in which models rather than the digital objects themselves can be analysed. In such setting, the use of appropriate metadata is very important, and the authors outline the PERICLES Linked Resource Model, an upper ontology for modelling digital ecosystems.</p>
<p>Library of Congress. (2016). Library of Congress demographic group terms. Retrieved from http://www.loc.gov/aba/publications/FreeLCDGT/freelcdgt.html.</p>
<p>This page provides PDF files for the 2016 Edition of the Library of Congress Demographic Group Terms (LCDGT) as well as the draft of the Demographic Group Terms Manual. The LCDGT vocabulary should be used in conjunction with the Manual, which provides guidelines and instructions for making proposals and for applying demographic group terms.</p>
<p>Library of Congress. (2016). Library of Congress to Cancel the Subject Heading “Illegal Aliens” . Retrieved from https://www.loc.gov/catdir/cpso/illegal-aliens-decision.pdf.</p>
<p>An annoucement from the Library of Congress to cancel the LC Subject Heading “Illegal Aliens” and replace it with two others, “Noncitizens” and “Unauthorized immigration” which would convey a similar idea but divorce the pejorative connotations. The summer includes the background and rationale for the cancellation.</p>
<p>Liew, C. L. (2005). Cross-cultural design and usability of a digital library supporting access to Maori cultural heritage resources. In Design and usability of digital libraries: Case studies in the Asia Pacific (pp. 285-297). Hershey, PA: Information Science Publishing.</p>
<p>The author describes the challenges of supporting access to Maori cultural heritage resources through digital libraries. There is some implicit discussion of culturally appropriate metadata with respect to the “representation and classification” of items in the digital library. They emphasize again that digital libraries should be targeted to a specific user group or groups and should meet their needs and interests. In the Maori context they note the use of Maori Subject Headings and Maori name Authority File rather than Anglo-American tools such as Library of Congress Subject Heading. A section devoted specifically to metadata standards details the use of metadata to govern rights management.</p>
<p>Littletree, S., & Metoyer, C. A. (2015). Knowledge organization from an indigenous perspective: The Mashantucket Pequot Thesaurus of American Indian Terminology Project. Cataloging & Classification Quarterly 53(5-6), 640-657. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01639374.2015.1010113</p>
<p>This article examines the conceptual foundations, theoretical framework, and application of the Thesaurus to a museum setting. As specialized, highly localized knowledge organization is being developed, how can it be supported in a larger context? What mechanisms do we need to make this information accessible across domains?</p>
<p>Lissonnet, S. (2004). (re)collections: Developing a metadata application profile for the Quinkan Culture Matchbox (Unpublished master's thesis). James Cook University, Queensland, Australia. Retrieved from http://researchonline.jcu.edu.au/1135/</p>
<p>Master's thesis describing development of a culturally appropriate metadata application profile for describing digital cultural heritage resources for the Quinkan community in Australia. Local contexts. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://localcontexts.org/</p>
<p>An initiative to support Native, First Nations, Aboriginal, and Indigenous communities in the management of their intellectual property and cultural heritage specifically within the digital environment. Local Contexts provides legal, extra-legal, and educational strategies for navigating copyright law and the public domain status of this valuable cultural heritage. By providing strategic resources and practical solutions, Local Contexts and our partners are working towards a new paradigm of rights and responsibilities that recognizes the inherent sovereignty that Indigenous communities have over their cultural heritage.</p>
<p>Lougheed, B., Moran, R., & Callison, C. (2015). Reconciliation through description: Using metadata to realize the vision of the National Research Centre for Truth and Reconciliation. Cataloging & Classification Quarterly 53(5-6), 596-614. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01639374.2015.1008718</p>
<p>This article will discuss the history and context surrounding the document collection and statement gathering mandates of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada and the challenges the newly established National Research Centre for Truth and Reconciliation will face in applying the Commission's metadata set in the realization of its vision. A useful case study for applying/expanding the traditional metadata assessment framework to include “priority issues” for marginalized communities (the importance of certain topics and the use of personally identifying information in name authority work).</p>
<p>Malta, M. C., & Baptista, A. A. (2014). A panoramic view on metadata application profiles of the last decade. International Journal of Metadata, Semantics and Ontologies 9(1), doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1504/IJMSO.2014.059124</p>
<p>This paper describes a study developed with the goal to understand the panorama of the metadata Application Profiles (AP): (i) what AP have been developed so far; (ii) what type of institutions have developed these AP; (iii) what are the application domains of these AP; (iv) what are the Metadata Schemes (MS) used by these AP; (v) what application domains have been producing MS; (vi) what are the Syntax Encoding Schemes (SES) and the Vocabulary Encoding Schemes (VES) used by these AP; and finally (vii) if these AP have followed the Singapore Framework (SF). We found (i) 74 AP; (ii) the AP are mostly developed by the scientific community, (iii) the 'Learning Objects' domain is the most intensive producer; (iv) Dublin Core metadata vocabularies are the most used and are being used in all domains of application and IEEE LOM is the second most used but only inside the 'Learning Objects' application domain; (v) the most intensive producer of MS is the domain of 'Libraries and Repositories'; (vi) 13 distinct SES and 90 distinct VES were used; (vi) five of the 74 AP found follow the SF.</p>
<p>Marchionini, G., Plaisant, C., & Komlodi, A. (2003). The people in digital libraries: Multifaceted approaches to assessing needs and impact. In Digital library use: social practice in design and evaluation (pp. 119-160). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Retrieved from https://ils.unc.edu/~march/revision.pdf</p>
<p>Multifaceted approaches to needs assessment and evaluation of digital libraries are illustrated with three case studies, with particular emphasis on a user's’ needs assessment conducted as part of a project to develop prototype interface designs for the Library of Congress National Digital Library Program. The human-centered design principle above links three clusters of constructs: people and their needs, characteristics, and contexts; design, implementation, and evaluation; and digital libraries.</p>
<p>Maron, D., Missen, C., & Greenberg, J. (2014). “Lo-fi to hi-fi”: A new metadata approach in the third world with the eGranary Digital Library. Presentation from the International Conference on Dublin Core and Metadata Applications. Retrieved from http://dcpapers.dublincore.org/pubs/article/view/3713</p>
<p>Digital information can bridge age-old gaps in access to information in traditionally underserved areas of the world. However, for those unfamiliar with abundant e-resources, their early exposure to the digital world can be like "drinking from a fire hose." For these audiences, abundant metadata and findability, along with easy-to-use interfaces, are key to their early success and adoption. To hasten the creation of metadata and user interfaces, the authors are experimenting with "crowd cataloging." This report documents their work and Maron's Lo-Fi to Hi-Fi metadata pyramid model guiding a developing metadata initiative being pursued with the eGranary Digital Library, the technology used by Widernet in a global effort to ameliorate information poverty. The Lo-Fi to Hi-Fi model, with principles adapted from technical design processes, aligns with research that has shown that community-based librarians are better poised to identify culturally congruent resources, but many require significant training in metadata concepts and skills. The model has students crowdsource "lo-fi" terms, which domain experts and information professionals can curate and cull in "hi-fi" to enhance findability of resources within the eGranary while simultaneously honing their own computer, information and metadata literacies. Though the focus here is on Africa, the findings and practices can be universalized to eGranaries around the globe, if successful.</p>
<p>Matusiak, K. K., Meng, L., Barczyk, E., & Shih, C. (2015). Multilingual metadata for cultural heritage materials. The Electronic Library 33(1), 136-151.</p>
<p>Multilingual indexing of collections of international origin addresses the linguistic needs of the target audience, connects the digitized objects to their respective cultures and contributes to richer descriptive records. The approach that relies on human translation and research can be undertaken in small-scale digitization projects of rare cultural heritage materials. The paper also discusses the obligations of holding institutions in undertaking digital conversion of the cultural heritage materials that originated in other countries, especially in regard to providing metadata records that reflect the language of the originating community.</p>
<p>Miksa, S. D. (2007). The challenges of change: A review of cataloging and classification literature, 2003-2004. Association for Library Collections & Technical Services 51(1).</p>
<p>Author reviews the influence of the Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Control (FRBR); the struggle to understand the ever-broadening concept of an "information entity;" steady developments in metadata-encoding standards; and the globalization of information systems, including multilinguistic challenges.</p>
<p>Mohd, T., Sembok, T., Zaman, H. B., Chen, H., Urs, S., & Myaen, S. H. (2003). Digital libraries: Technology and management of indigenous knowledge for global access. New York: Springer.</p>
<p>Several interesting chapters: “Metadata for Online Resources and Learning Object…” (pg. 505), “Indigenous Multimedia Content Development for E-learning” (pg. 627), and “Metadata+++ A Scalable Hierarchical Framework for Digital Libraries” (pg. 696).</p>
<p>Nevile, L., & Lissonnet, S. (2005). Was CIMI too early? Dublin Core and museum information: Metadata as cultural heritage data. Presentation from the DC-2005: Proc. Int. Conf. on Dublin Core and Metadata Applications. Retrieved from https://www.researchgate.net/publication/220094822.</p>
<p>In 2000, the museum community reported on the use of Dublin Core metadata in the museum context and proposed a broader set of elements for museums. Since then, Dublin Core metadata has evolved and it is now possible to use rich descriptions (data) and Semantic Web technologies and maintain the interoperability of Dublin Core metadata. This paper reviews the museum experience in the light of developments in the DCMES. It is based on recent experience with a virtual museum of Indigenous culture using Metadata Application Profiles (MAPs) and schema crosswalks.</p>
<p>Olson, H. A. (2007). How we construct subjects: A feminist analysis. Library Trends 56(2), 509-541.</p>
<p>To organize information, librarians create structures that grow from a logic that goes back at least as far as Aristotle. It is the basis of classification as we practice it, and thesauri and subject headings have developed from it. Feminist critiques of logic suggest that logic is gendered in nature. This article explores how these critiques play out in contemporary standards for the organization of information. Our widely used classification schemes embody principles such as hierarchical force that conform to traditional/Aristotelian logic. Our subject heading strings follow a linear path of subdivision. Our thesauri break down subjects into discrete concepts. In thesauri and subject heading lists we privilege hierarchical relationships, reflected in the syndetic structure of broader and narrower terms, over all other relationships. Are our classificatory and syndetic structures gendered? Are these other options? Carol Gilligan's In a Different Voice (1982), Women's Ways of Knowing (Belenky, Clinchy, Goldberger, & Tarule, 1986), and more recent related research suggest a different type of structure for women's knowledge grounded in "connected knowing." This article explores current and potential elements of connected knowing in subject access with a focus on the relationships, both paradigmatic and syntagmatic, between concepts.</p>
<p>Olson, H. A., & Schlegl, R. (2001). Standardization, objectivity, and user focus: A meta analysis of subject access critiques. Cataloging and Classification Quarterly 32(2), 61-80.</p>
<p>Critiques of subject access standards in LIS literature have addressed biases of gender, sexuality, race, age, ability, ethnicity, language and religion as limits to the representation of diversity and to effective library service for diverse populations. The current study identifies and analyzes this literature as a basis for ameliorating systemic bias and to gather the existing literature for wider accessibility. The study analyzes five quantitative variables: standards discussed, categories of problems, marginalized groups and topics discussed, date, and basis of conclusions (research or experience). Textual analysis reveals that basic tenets of subject access-user-focused cataloguing, objectivity, and standardization-are problematized in the literature and may be the best starting point for future research. In practice, librarians can work to counteract systemic problems in the careful and equitable application of standards and their adaptation to local contexts.</p>
<p>Oppeneer, M. (2008). A value sensitive design approach to indigenous knowledge management systems. Ethnos Project. Retrieved from http://resources.ethnosproject.org/a-value-sensitive-design-approach-to-indigenous-knowledge-management-systems/</p>
<p>In terms of Indigenous knowledge management, typical database structures often do not work for storing cultural knowledge. For instance, when recording oral traditions, the usual metadata tags regarding ownership (author, copyright data, publishing information, etc.) do not apply. Primarily oral cultures that do not ascribe ownership of knowledge to individuals, that do not recognize the ‘right to copy’ in the way Western cultures do, and that do not publish but rather perform their stories, histories, and ceremonies, would find little use for such metadata...How does one catalog unscripted expression? How does one account for the possibilities of variation? Similarly, for cultures that understand the power of images differently than Western cultures do, the storage and retrieval of photographs (especially of ancestors) is problematic. A guiding question that informs this investigation then is how does one construct a knowledge management system that respects the various ways in which Indigenous peoples interact with their own sense of cultural memory?</p>
<p>Park, J. (2007). Cross-lingual name and subject access: Mechanisms and challenges. Library Resources & Technical Services 51(3), 180-189.</p>
<p>Impediments to enhancing access to cross-cultural and cross-lingual resources are largely derived from the complexities and variation of linguistic structures across languages. Linguistic and cultural approaches in developing cross-lingual and cross-cultural knowledge organization systems are critically needed. Semantic mapping, involving metadata and subject heading lists across languages, is one of the most critical issues in resource discovery and information exchange. In order to develop interoperable conceptual mapping guidelines across languages and cultures, identification of lexicalization patterns based on semantic, syntactic, and pragmatic linguistic analysis is critically needed.</p>
<p>Pellack, L. J., & Kappmeyer, L. O. (2011). The ripple effect of women's name changes in indexing, citation, and authority control. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 62(3), 440-448.</p>
<p>The works of eight library science authors who had published under multiple names were examined. The researchers compared author names as they appeared on title pages of publications versus in four online databases and in bibliographies by checking 380 publications and 1,159 citations. Recommendations are made for changes in editorial styles by indexing services and by the authors themselves to help alleviate future confusion in author name searching.</p>
<p>Roberto, K. R.  (2011). Inflexible bodies: Metadata for transgender identities. Journal of Information Ethics 20(2), 56-64.</p>
<p>The author examines the Library of Congress Subject Headings and Classification that relate to gender, particularly transgender people. The author challenges readers to consider gender as fluid, and the result of cultural framing, and that identities can be temporary and overlapping. The author poses questions for the field, such as how librarians can employ vocabularies that reflect their communities’ realities.</p>
<p>Sadler, B., & Bourg, C. (2015). Feminism and the future of library discovery. Code4Lib Journal 28.</p>
<p>The authors argue that library practices are not and never have been neutral. The authors examine the ways in which libraries and librarians influence the production of and access to scholarship. The authors offer detailed discussions of Feminist HCI, perceptions of search algorithms as “neutral” and the importance of emphasizing how search experiences can and should acknowledge the physical bodies and emotions of users.</p>
<p>Sahadath, C. (2013). Classifying the margins: Using alternative classification systems to empower diverse and marginalized users. Feliciter 59(3) 15-17.</p>
<p>The article discusses the use of alternative classification systems to improve library services to diverse and marginalized populations in Canada. The shortcomings of popular classification systems such as the Library of Congress (LC) and Dewey Decimal Classification (DDC) scheme are mentioned. The federal institution Library and Archives Canada (LAC) has addressed this issue by making additions to the LC scheme. Another alternative is the Brian Deer Classification System.</p>
<p>Samek, T. (2016, September 14). Mind the metadata [Web log post]. Retrieved from https://cfe.ryerson.ca/blog/2016/09/mind-metadata</p>
<p>Library and information workers use their education and experience to support intellectual freedom and address social concerns, such as by lobbying for copyright reform for peoples with print disabilities, exposing how commercial Internet filters are biased against sexual and gender minorities, collaborating with social workers on library services for homeless people, and fighting to safeguard cultural heritage in the context of war, conflict, and genocide. Sometimes their work comes down to a single word. The author explores where subject headings originate, and who determines these controlled vocabularies and advocates for using metadata as an alternative discourse to integrate indigenous knowledge into cataloging and classification practices.</p>
<p>Samuelsson, J. (2010). Knowledge organization for feminism and feminist research: A discourse oriented study of systematic outlines, logical structures, semantics, and the process of indexing. Knowledge Organization 37(1) 3-28.</p>
<p>The focus in this article is an analysis of the knowledge organization systems that index and classify feminist research texts in a Swedish bibliographic context. Feminist perspectives are analyzed through text analysis of PhD dissertations as feminist articulations. I also analyze the possibilities to classify and index feminist research with the national universal knowledge organization systems (KOS).</p>
<p>Srinivasan, R., Boast, R., Furner, J., & Becvar, K.M. (2009). Digital museums and diverse cultural knowledges: Moving past the traditional catalog. The Information Society 25(4), 265–278.</p>
<p>The authors argue that the digital environment enables digital libraries, archives, and museums to move away from relying solely on the descriptions of ‘experts’ to incorporating multiple, even contradictory, perspectives. This enables more effective and appropriate description of resources for, by, and about diverse communities.</p>
<p>Tanner, S. (2016). Using impact as a strategic tool for developing the digital library via the value balanced impact model. Library & Leadership Management 30(4). Retrieved from https://journals.tdl.org/llm/index.php/llm/article/view/7146</p>
<p>This paper will discuss how the recently developed Balanced Value Impact Model measures a digital resource by balancing both internal organizational and external community perspectives with social and economic considerations. This will be illustrated with research case studies from the Wellcome Library digitization programme and Europeana Impact Taskforce. The paper will further suggest means by which thinking about the value chain from activity, through output, to outcomes and impact can enhance strategic planning for digital libraries.</p>
<p>Taylor, Andrew. (2016). GOP reinstates usage of 'illegal alien' in Library of Congress' records. PBS Newshour. Retrieved from http://www.pbs.org/newshour/rundown/gop-reinstates-usage-of-illegal-alien-in-library-of-congress-records/</p>
<p>Announcement from Associated Press via PBS Newshour that the vote to cancel of Library of Congress subject heading “illegal aliens” and replace it with two others, “noncitizens” and “unauthorized immigration” was declined before moving on to the Republican dominated House.</p>
<p>Visual Resources Association Foundation. (2006). CCO Toolkit. Retrieved from http://cco.vrafoundation.org/index.php/toolkit/</p>
<p>This resource serves as a guide for data content standards for the cultural heritage community. It was created to help establish best practices for digital libraries, museums, and archives in describing objects to improve their discoverability and use. Explanations of style, culture, and date, for example, assume Western viewpoints. On page 156, the writers state, “Designations of style, period, group, or movement are derived from scholarly tradition within given fields of expertise,” which asks the reader to assume that these designations come from authorities and that their views of period and style, for example, are neutral and widely accepted.</p>
<p>Wood, S., Carbone, K., Cifor, M., Gilliland, A., & Punzalan, R. (2014). Mobilizing records: re-framing archival description to support human rights. Archival Science 14(3-4), 397-419. doi: 10.1007/s10502-014-9233-1</p>
<p>This article seeks to raise consciousness within the field of archival studies in order to foster a generative discussion about how descriptive practices might be expanded, approached differently, or completely rethought.</p>
<p>Zeng, M. L., Lee, J., & Hayes, A. F. (2009). Metadata decisions for digital libraries: A survey report. Journal of Library Metadata 9(3-4), 173-193. doi: 10.1080/19386380903405074.</p>
<p>Survey conducted at the end of 2007 that informed changes to the IFLA Guidelines for Digital Libraries. “The questionnaire included a question of the roles respondents may have, and five questions of the major concerns in any project that relates to metadata, regarding design and planning of digital projects, element set standards, data contents in a record, authority files and controlled vocabularies, and metadata encoding.”</p>
<p><a href="#annotated-bibliography-for-cultural-assessment-of-digital-collections">Back to Top</a></p>

<h2>Selection Processes</h2>
<p>Ayris, P. (1998). Guidance for selecting materials for digitisation. In Joint RLG and NPO Preservation Conference: Guidelines for Digital Imaging. Retrieved from http://eprints.ucl.ac.uk/492/1/paul_ayris3.pdf</p>
<p>This document offers guidance for information professionals regarding the selection and prioritization of items to digitize. It reviews a number of approaches used by reputable institutions and includes an example decision-making matrix.</p>
<p>Bantin, J., & Agne, L. (2010). Digitizing for value: A user-based strategy for university archives. Journal of Archival Organization 8(3), 244-250.</p>
<p>Two archivists present results of a qualitative local reference survey as a means of developing an informed, user-driven approach to selection for digitization in university archives. While every institution remains unique to a point, it is hoped that this survey will be of use to other university archivists who seek to narrow the broad spectrum of possible digitization projects to an optimally-strategic demand-driven few.</p>
<p>Bašić, J., Hasenay, D., & Krtalić, M. (2010). What is worth of digitizing?: The selection criteria. Presentation at the BOBCATSS 2010 Conference. Retrieved from  http://bib.irb.hr/prikazi-rad?rad=457373  </p>
<p>This paper examines selection criteria for digitization used by institutions across several countries. It outlines the most common criteria used and examines the differences between criteria.</p>
<p>Brancolini, K. R. (2000). Selecting research collections for digitization: Applying the Harvard model. Library Trends 48(4), 783-798.</p>
<p>This article presents the results of a post-project evaluation. At the time the original digitization project was completed, the author's institution used a combination of internal criteria as well as that set out in the Library of Congress/Ameritech competition from the mid-1990s. The author questioned whether the team would have made the same decision to digitize the collection if they had worked through the decision-making process of the Harvard model (details in the paper). The author determines that the team would, in fact, have made the same decision. In finding significant overlap in their own decision-making process with the Harvard model, the author determines "Harvard Model provides an excellent foundation for creating a local adaptation. It is comprehensive, yet flexible." Ultimately, however, the author argues that institutions should extend and adapt the Harvard model to their own local context. In doing so, such institutions are poised to both "[spend] resources wisely" as well as to "[preserve] valuable collections." The author acknowledges the extreme subjectivity of many of the Harvard model's initial questions related to value but does not really unpack the variety of ways in which one might think about value. The underlying assumption seems to remain that value means the biggest impact for the largest audience.</p>
<p>Bülow, A., Spencer, R., & Ahmon, J. (2011). The process of selection. In A. Bülow, R. Spencer, & J. Ahmon (Eds.), Preparing collections for digitization (pp. 47-61). London: Facet Publishing.</p>
<p>This chapter provides a high-level overview for how one can manage the selection process. It separates what it identifies as the "process of selection" from criteria for selection, claiming that "selection criteria are covered in detail by other authors." Nonetheless, the chapter echoes high-level criteria for selecting materials for digitization, including content, demand, and condition. Importantly, the authors recommend beginning with an assessment of rights and ownership issues prior to taking up these other topics. In addition, they emphasize digitization for both popular and vulnerable collections, but they also say that a "sustainable" digitization program should also have a "broader wish-list of potential projects." As part of the selection process, the authors recommend a small review panel that can assess proposals for digitization "from all angles."  By "all angles," they seem to mean all procedural angles—such as rights, the condition of the materials, and the technology required. At several points throughout the chapter, the authors do recognize the highly subjective work of identifying collections for digitization, particularly in regard to performing cost-benefit analyses. Because this work is highly contextual and subjective, they recommend that each institution doing digitization work have its own selection policy.</p>
<p>De Stefano, P. (2001). Selection for digital conversion in academic libraries. College & Research Libraries 62(1), 58-69.</p>
<p>Early article on digitization / digital conversion, this piece takes traditional principles of collection development and applies them to selection for digitization. The author recommends that institutions take a use-based approach, where materials known to be in highest demand—especially by campus stakeholders (students, faculty)—be prioritized first for digitization. The article argues that special collections must prioritize campus users over public users, even asserting that: “It is hard to imagine that a broad-based local user community benefits by the improved access to special collections.” The article emphasizes preservation as a primary motivation for digitization, indicating that frequently used materials should be digitized to avoid wear and tear on the originals.</p>
<p>Dryden, J. (2014). The role of copyright in selection for digitization. The American Archivist 77(1), 64-95. doi:10.17723/aarc.77.1.3161547p1678423w</p>
<p>Reports the results of a 2013 study of how copyright was affecting which US archives were selecting for digitization. The article also makes suggestions about tools that institutions can use to perform risk assessment when considering copyright in selection for digitization.The study used three sources of data: an analysis of the website content of 96 repositories, 66 responses to a mail survey sent to those repositories, and 18 interviews with repository staff responsible for digitization. The researchers’ findings indicate that copyright continues to be a significant barrier to digitization of and online access to materials that are under copyright or which may require effort to determine copyright status. Archivists significantly over select materials for digitization that have clear copyright (either public domain, CC0, or where the archives has clear license to digitize and make available online). Their findings also point to a trend where these assessments are increasingly made at the collection level rather than item level (“is this collection likely to require staff time to determine or clear copyright;” rather than “is this item going to require staff time to determine or clear copyright issues”). Notably, according to the study, half of the interviewees “stated that if an item was going to be a copyright problem (i.e., requiring staff time and effort to identify, locate, and contact rights holders to obtain permission to digitize and disseminate online), it was immediately removed from further consideration for online access.” The authors did not analyze the content of materials deselected for digitization / online access due to copyright concerns.</p>
<p>Gertz, J. (2013). Should you? May you? Can you? Factors in selecting rare books and special collections for digitization. Computers in Libraries 33(2), 6-11.</p>
<p>Argues that digitization selection decisions are tantamount to collection development decisions and recommend best practices for developing structure around these decisions. They recommend selection criteria that prioritizes: archivist-determined value of content (e.g., unique or rare, aesthetically appealing, or associated with important people or events), demand from users (based on clear identification of target audiences), whether digitization will substantially enhance the material, whether the material has already been digitized elsewhere, legal limitations/restrictions (e.g., copyright), digitization as preservation, and technical difficulties digitizing the material. The authors note in summary that, “Digitization makes most sense when there are materials that people want to use that are not available elsewhere online, when good metadata is available, and when copyright issues do not prevent online dissemination. The argument in favor of digitization is especially strong when there is an opportunity to add value, whether by protecting fragile originals and documenting badly deteriorating items or by providing a new contextual framework or functionality.” The authors don’t suggest sharing decision-making power with communities or authorities outside the archive, and do not discuss the selection bias that these recommendations might result in the content of online collections.</p>
<p>Hazen, D., Horrell, J., & Merrill-Oldham, J. (1998). Selecting research collections for digitization. Washington, D. C.: Council on Library and Information Resources (CLIR). Retrieved from http://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/hazen/pub74.html</p>
<p>Lays out Harvard’s approach to decision-making around selection for digitization. One question that they ask about potential materials is about their scholarly value. The authors indicate that “Scholarly value, of course, is a subjective assessment and even the most marginal materials can support some kinds of research.” This subjectivity is not discussed further, although the article is thoughtful about taking a holistic approach to include rights, metadata, and scanning specifications among the criteria to consider prior to selection and digitization.    </p>
<p>International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions. (2014). Guidelines for planning the digitization of rare book and manuscript collections. Retrieved from http://www.ifla.org/files/assets/rare-books-and-manuscripts/rbms-guidelines/guidelines-for-planning-digitization.pdf</p>
<p>IFLA's Guidelines for Planning the Digitization of Rare Book and Manuscript Collections focus at the conceptual level on strategies for planning and implementing digitization projects. The guidelines begin with a series of values that ultimately guided the development of the document, go on to cover eight key areas—-from initial design of the project through preservation—in digitization projects, and conclude with a summary list of recommendations. The entire document is only 19 pages long, so the guidelines do not go into very much detail in any one area. When it comes to selection of materials for digitization, it is actually the "values" statements and final recommendations, more than the chapter on selection itself that provides the most insight into the author's' beliefs about selection for digitization. For example, in the chapter on selection, the guidelines offer that selection "relies heavily on specialist librarians," depends on the goals/design of the project, that the best physical copy should be used, and that condition of the materials overall must be evaluated (p. 8). The guidelines advise against digitization on demand as the "basis of a collection," though it can certainly be helpful for developing content (p. 9). The chapter identifies copyright and other ownership rights as a key area for any digitization project, and it also advises that is best to digitize an entire "intellectual entity" rather than only a part of it. While this chapter glosses over the complexities of selection with regard to a specific project's goals/design, or in relation to a larger digitization program, the list of values that opens the document and the recommendations that conclude it suggest there is much more to be explored. In particular, the guidelines encourage librarians and archivists to "leverage digitization projects to provide access to collections that have been hidden in the past" (pp. 5, 16), but this idea is not significantly developed in the guidelines.  </p>
<p>Mills, A. (2015). User impact on selection, digitization, and the development of digital special collections. New Review of Academic Librarianship 20(2), 160-169. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13614533.2015.1042117</p>
<p>This article focuses on the selection of special collections materials for digitization. Materials in an institution's special collections have already been through an appraisal process, and Mills argues that selection for digitization is a "re-selection" process. There are a number of factors institutions might consider in such re-selection for digitization, including user demand, reducing wear and tear on originals, commercial or financial motivations, or political motivations (pp. 161-162). Despite, or perhaps because of, the range of issues institutions might consider, digitization is often done ad hoc. Mills refutes such ad hoc decision making and instead argues for a selection process that combines user demand as well as institutional expertise and institutional requirements. With regard to user demand, Mills advocates for assessing user needs via a variety of data points, including "Consultation, reference, and reproduction request data, and Web metrics" (p. 163), and also cautions against using the needs of only a select few researchers for decision-making (p. 164). Such user-driven digitization should not represent the entirety of an institution's digitization efforts, however, according to Mills. Focusing only on user demand has the potential to skew an institution's digital collections, "assembling haphazard digital collections that do not support institutional missions and goals" or those that reflect only current scholarship/trends without looking forward (p. 165). Therefore, Mills ultimately advocates for selection processes that include both user-driven digitization projects as well as institution-driven digitization projects. For institutional projects, selection criteria include preservation needs, interest level, and connection to the institutional mission.</p>
<p>Ooghe, B., & Moreels, D. (2009). Analysing selection for digitisation: Current practices and common incentives. D-Lib Magazine,15(9/10). Retrieved from http://www.dlib.org/dlib/september09/ooghe/09ooghe.html  </p>
<p>The article formulates a set of common criteria for selection of cultural heritage materials for digitization by way of a sector-independent longlist. In this way the article illustrates the complex nature of selection, which may be seen to depend upon significantly greater number of criteria than have so far been put forward in any single guiding document, but it also proposes a base-terminology that can be used in any institutional setting. Thus, it puts forward a possible common ground for selection practices and argues that the adoption of a more uniform language, and a more open and communicative approach, may not only help structure the decision-making process but is also a vital part of good governance. </p>
<p>Seadle, M. (1998). Building on the Cornell-Yale model: Digitizing the radicalism collection at Michigan State University. Library Hi Tech, 16(2), 19-36.</p>
<p>Seadle compares and contrasts digitization projects of Cornell and Yale, and the emergence of the Cornell-Yale model, with one effort at Michigan State University in the late 1990s. The article details similarities and differences with regard to program goals and the impact of these goals on selection the selection of materials, technology for digitization (hardware, software, and standards), preservation, and access. In doing so, the piece highlights several considerations that guided the Cornell, Yale, and Michigan State projects in their selection of materials. These included preservation, value/anticipated for scholarship, and curricular need. At Michigan State, the digitization effort was in response to curricular need and providing access to heavily used items in the collections. Michigan State was interested in current use versus anticipated use and making high use materials more readily and conveniently available. This contrasts with the "Great Collections" and "Core Collections" approach to value taken by Yale and Cornell.</p>
<p>Summerlin, D. (2014). Selecting newspaper titles for digitization at the Digital Library of Georgia. D-Lib Magazine, 20(9/10). http://www.dlib.org/dlib/september14/summerlin/09summerlin.html. </p>
<p>Newspapers have been a significant target for digitization over the last decade, and libraries, archives, and other cultural institutions must decide how best to utilize their limited funds to digitize a select number of newspaper titles for public consumption. This case study examines the Digital Library of Georgia's newspaper digitization selection process and how it incorporates national standards with its own project-specific criteria. The article includes a discussion of the roles played by user demand, content significance, funding, copyright, optical character recognition, and microfilm holdings in the decision making process, with the ultimate goal of creating highly used, well-regarded, and cost effective online newspaper archives.</p>
<p>Weintraub, J., & Wisner, M. (2008). MASS Digitization at Yale University Library: Exposing the treasures in our stacks. Computers In Libraries, 28(9), 10-16.</p>
<p>This article provides an example of a digitization partnership between a corporate partner and an academic library and of how such a partnership can affect selection criteria. (The article itself covers the overall project, including workflow and technology, but this annotation emphasizes the selection stage/criteria of the project.) Yale University Libraries partnered with Microsoft to digitized 100,000 volumes from its holdings. These were not special collections volumes, but circulating volumes. Microsoft determined some of selection criteria, including that the volumes needed to be English-language books, pre-1923, and from specific subject areas, including art, art history, history, and religion. Working with this criteria, the Yale University Libraries established some additional criteria, based in large part on physical aspects of the book: size (books could not be too tall or wide for the scanner); whether the book could be opened to the necessary angle to allow for digitization; the number of loose pages in the volume; the number of pages stuck together in the volume; whether the book was warped; whether there was significant text in the gutter of the page; whether the book pages were brittle. These criteria emerge from two concerns: whether the book could be effectively digitized, and whether or not digitization would harm the volume. Ultimately, Microsoft pulled out of the partnership before the work was complete, and approximately 30,000 volumes will have been fully digitized. The article does not indicate why Microsoft had the selection criteria that it did, though one can imagine the corporate interests that were at stake. For Yale's part, the authors indicate that while the subject areas were appropriate for their collections, they would have liked to have dealt with foreign-language materials.</p>
<p><a href="#annotated-bibliography-for-cultural-assessment-of-digital-collections">Back to Top</a></p>
